All right, cool, sort of or yeah. Ok. So it's required. Awesome. Well, if
somebody is listening to this, forgive my voice, I'm getting over a cold. So.
Ok. Anyway. Ok. So thank you so much for coming to this interview. I really
appreciate it. Thanks for asking. And here's a little background on my project.
So I'm researching genome editing and reviewing technology focusing on CRISPR M
RT, which is mitochondrial replacement therapy and PGD, which is pre genetic
diagnosis, which is used in IVF. So in my paper, I'm exploring some ethical
questions that surround these technologies. And I became really interested in
this topic last year in my genetics class with Dr Barton recording in progress
when we listened to a podcast that had some negative views on CRISPR. And I was
very surprised since when I first heard about CRISPR, I was like, oh my gosh,
this is so cool. This is so exciting. So hearing some conflicting opinions, I
was like, oh, wow, I want to look into this more. I love that. So I'm wondering
if I'd like to know what podcast it was after this interview, ask him about it.
Ok. But my question. Can you tell me a little bit about your personal experience
first hearing about CRISPR like the very first time and what your initial
thoughts were, were you excited? Were you a little nervous? What's going on?
Cool. So I first heard about CRISPR. Um So I was in grad school when CRISPR came
out and became super like ubiquitous. Um But when I first heard about it, it was
from one of my lab mates who I just, I admire him so much. He was like one of
those early adopters he heard about it knew it was gonna be important. And
ultimately, it got him a faculty job because he was able to like jump on the
train real fast. He studied zebrafish development and he gave lab meeting once
and he was like, there's this new technique called CRISPR where you can modify
the genome um pretty straightforwardly. And his was one of the first papers that
developed uh like basically every lab with their own little model system. When
CRISPR came out, they were like, here's how you can use CRISPR and zebrafish.
Here's how you can use CRISPR and flies. Here's how you can use CRISPR and yeast
because it was so easy. It was, that's what makes it special is it's really
straightforward to use. Um Like usually when you're trying to modify the genome,
people come out with papers and they're like, check out this new technology,
it's gonna change your world and then people try it and they're like, no, it did
not live up to the hype CRISPR was very easy. Everyone who tried it was able to
get what they wanted really easily anyway. So this guy lean in my lab, he was
like CRISPR. It's gonna be big. I wanna develop the technology in zebrafish. And
my boss was like, um that's not what we study. Uh Please don't waste your time
on this too much. But he did, he ended up getting it working in zebrafish really
easily submitted. A paper was one of the first people to publish in zebrafish.
So now he's very well cited because everyone wanted to use the tools he
developed. Anyway, he has a lab now because of it. So like my boss was wrong. Um
Anyway, um but then like over the next year or so, so at first when I was in lab
meeting, I had no idea what he was talking about because I was a young grad
student. And I remember being like, all right, I have no opinion on this. It
just, it didn't blow my mind or anything. But over the next year or two, it
became super ubiquitous. Everyone was talking about it, everyone who's using it.
And um yeah, uh it, it, I got to live through the kind of revolution that
happened while I was in grad school. So yeah, I was a little bit, I, I didn't
adopt it because I study yeast and yeast on their own are pretty easily to
genetically modify. That's why they're a great model system because there are
things you can do in yeast that you couldn't do in human cells. Now, you can do
those things in human cells and people don't care about yeast as much anymore
because they're like, why study yeast when you study humans anyway, I'm going
down the road that I don't have to. Um but I was able to, I was like, we should
get on the CRISPR train. So a couple of summers ago we started using CRISPR in
my lab too and I found that it was very easy to get the precise genetic changes
that we wanted it to, to do. So I took me way too long to, to pick it up. But
when I did, I was like, yeah, this is easy, super straightforward. OK. It's
enough. Yeah. Um Do you think that it's going to be used widely in treating
genetic diseases one day or do you think it's gonna become like the new norm in
health care? Yeah. So my approach to it is that it's, it's already become just
like a standard tool in the lab. Everyone uses CRISPR to study their specific
question. So they're not necessarily studying CRISPR, but they're like, hey, I'm
interested in cell signal light. Let me use CRISPR to knock out a gene, et
cetera. So it already is super widely used in the lab and just everyone uses it.
It's not even a big deal anymore. It's kind of like doing PC R if you've heard
of it, everyone does PC R. It was really big, really important, but now it's
like a standard tool as far as affecting humans. I'm a little skeptical about it
being super widely used for a couple of reasons. The main reason is that the
genetic disorders um that it could treat are limited. So many genetic disorders
um are not inherited in a what's called simple Mendelian inheritance pattern.
So, so the disorder that it is used to treat now, sickle cell anemia and beta
thalassemia. It's one mutation, one letter change in the whole genome causes you
to get sickle cell or beta thalassemia. And CRISPR nowadays isn't even used to
fix that one mutation. CRISPR breaks a different thing to fix sickle cell
anemia. So CRISPR is being used to break a gene to repair a problem, we can go
into it. Um But CRISPR is really good at breaking things. Uh and, and sometimes
that can be used to repair. There's a whole thing we can talk about but we
probably won't have time. Um But most genetic inherited genetic disorders aren't
even, that's simply inherited. It's not one mutation, it's multigenic, there are
lots of genes involved in it or maybe if that there was like a gene duplication
where a gene got copied. Like I literally just talked about this one genetic
disorder called sarcoma tooth disease, which is a gene duplication and so CRISPR
can't fix it the same way. Anyway, I think the number of diseases that can be
treated are limited. And how the big question is, how do you treat the specific
cells that you need to treat? Like? Do you treat the whole embryo or do you
treat specific cells? And with beta thalassemia and single cell anemia, all you
have to do is take out all you have to do quote unquote. This is hard, it's
relatively easy. Take out the bone marrow, fiddle with blood stem cells,
irradiate a person's whole bone marrow so that you kill off all of the, their
endogenous stem cells and then re inject the engineered stem cells. That's easy
to do. But imagine a person that has brain cancer. How do you get CRISPR to the
brain specifically? And cancer causes a lot of mutations? So how do you fix all
those mutations or the positive ones? It's a lot harder then. It seems like it
would be like it's an easy tool to use, but it's still hard to use. Do you think
it's more like researchers not knowing exactly how a certain disease works? And
so that's why we can't use CRISPR or is it more like CRISPR itself is not
advanced enough? I think researchers, I think, I think researchers know a lot
about like what mutations underlie a disease like we can sequence like we've
talked about bioinformatics, we can sequence a person's tumor and we can
sequence their healthy cells and we can figure out where all the mutations are.
And in theory fix all those mutations. Like we know at least genetically what's
wrong, even if we don't know physiologically necessarily what happens as a
consequence of those mutations. So I think that we, we can understand where the
mutations are. What I think is limited is, is um the delivery. I think of
CRISPR. How do you deliver it to the right cells at the right time and not cause
off target effects, not get CRISPR to go to the wrong gene. And that's, that's
what CRISPR is good at is its specificity. But everything in biology makes
mistakes. And so how do we make sure that it's specific enough to be OK with
beta thalassemia? The thing that's been FDA approved, we could take out a bone
marrow, fiddle with the cells sequence those cells before we put them back in a
patient. But if it's a, if you trying to get CRISPR into the body, you can't
like double check it before injecting cells. And so there are a lot of questions
about that, let alone that being done in a consenting adult versus an embryo.
So, yeah, I know that's another one of your questions coming up. Yeah. Yeah, I
think it's just the delivery is harder than we realize it's gonna be. Yeah. And
that's why the currently FDA approved one. Fantastic life changing for people
with these blood disorders. It's not, it doesn't, it doesn't mean it's a home
run for every other disease though. Yeah. Cool. Thank you for that. Um, I'm also
wondering, do you think that this topic, why do you think this topic is
important to teach biology students? And also, do you think it should be taught
to a wider audience outside biology? I love that question. Yes. I think this is
a biology topic that's not going away and not only has to do with human health
and the future of human health, it has to do with agriculture and the way we
grow our plants and are modifying our plants to get them. There's this whole
idea of like, do we call CRISPR engineered plants GMO S or not? And it's like,
that's all like a semantic thing so that people don't freak out, are they
allowed to be called organic or not? Um using? Uh and, and also like just with
like fertility issues too, I think that's not going away too. Um So there are
lots of applications and I do think the wider audience like what, what when I
talk to the general audience about this, um my family members is what I mean,
they're all worried about super soldiers and I'm like, that is not where we're
headed with this. We need to educate about OK, there are real ethical questions.
We're not making some super soldiers, but we are potentially affecting embryos
and definitely with pre um, preimplantation screening, we're definitely
selecting embryos. I mean, there's education we need to have about this. Um, I'm
excited because next semester, so I taught a CRISPR class for majors for upper
level majors students. Last semester. Next semester, I'm gonna totally adapt the
class, but I'm teaching two honors classes. So non majors, I'm gonna teach
CRISPR too. So I'm really excited about talking to non scientists about this
like moral and ethical and scientific and molecular topic. So, yeah, I already
take that class. You have, you are taking, I want to. Oh, it's awesome. I want
like it was one of my favorite classes to teach last year for Rangers. It was
really good. I'm glad you're doing that. That's really important. I'm excited
about it. So, on that ethical note, a lot of the general consensus surrounding
CRISPR is that it's ethical to use it as a treatment on somatic cells or body
cells. But it's very cautious approached when it's used to prevent genetic
diseases, especially in embryos by editing germline cells, which are our gametes
because the offspring from that embryo will also be affected continuously. So,
what do you think about this debate? Where are you, are you, do you have any
thoughts and do you think regulation should be put in place for how we can use
CRISPR on certain cells? Perfect. Yeah. No, you're, you've totally got it. Down.
That's the red line that scientists have drawn that the public is also
comfortable with when they've surveyed the public. And yeah, you're right.
There's an issue of affecting embryos in that. Yes. A you're affecting non
consenting individuals and b you're affecting all of that individual's offspring
as well. So, uh that's why no one's OK with this right now. I mean, some people
are, there's this crazy guy here at church who wants to do it. But anyway, um
this is why Jennifer Doudna, for example, um made the statement that we need to
kind of draw this line. So I'm in full agreement of it. I think if consenting
adults are willing to enter into clinical trials and and it be tested and it be
something that saves your life like this, this person Victoria Gray who you
probably heard about in genetics last year. She um she was cured of sickle cell
anemia, like cured. She no longer needs blood transfusions. Her whole life is
changed now because of it and she was brave enough to go through this process.
Her kids aren't, aren't affected by it because she had already had her kids and
this first format cells gonna be effect being affected. I think that individuals
who want to be like the brave like guinea pigs. Absolutely. And, and it has the
potential to change our life. But I agree that we should not be affecting
embryos like that doctor, he the Chinese scientist that was absolutely not. OK.
Yeah, we're not near that point now to be able to talk about doing that. So,
yeah, I agree with the consensus. OK. Awesome. Thank you for that. Um So a
little bit on that line is this new technology based in the UK called M RT,
which is mitochondrial replacement therapy. And this is used when for rare
genetic diseases that are inherited by mitochondrial DNA, which is like that one
little percent that is in our mitochondria instead of the nucleus. And so
basically what they're doing in this technology is they're taking a donor egg,
taking all of the DNA out of the nucleus, putting the mother's DNA into the
nucleus, but keeping that donor mitochondrial DNA. And so some issues here or
some questions here are that when that embryo may become a male that is not,
he's not um that mitochondrial DNA is not going to be affecting his offspring
since it's inherited maternally. But if the embryo becomes a female, then that
would be affecting her offspring. So, in this technology, do we, are we more
concerned about avoiding germline mutation or germline editing or are we more
concerned about protecting the potential for all life, whether male or female?
Yeah. Well, I hadn't thought about the whole male versus female aspect to it.
That's a really good point. Um Wow, I really like that. Yeah. And the whole idea
of in, in my head, I'm like, yeah, let's do it because the ethical question here
is, is it more ethical to, you know, have an offspring who's gonna have a
challenging mitochondrial disorder, mitochondrial disorders are, are really
devastating because it's your mitochondria, right? And so it affects um all
sorts of like it affects your musculature, it affects your brain because your
brain uses energy a lot too. So, is it more ethical to have to allow uh having
an offspring who has this disorder, a mitochondrial inherited disorder versus
allowing them to live a life? It's free of that. Of course, there's always the
question of like, maybe you could not have kids and maybe you can adopt. And
this one ethics book that I read was basically saying that it's like we don't
have to choose, we, we can just not propagate and have biological kids. Although
I know that's so important for a lot of people to have their own biological
kids. Um But my inherent bias is to say that it should be permitted. Um because
I, I just, I would hate to have a kid knowing that I'm passing on like if I were
a woman and I had this, I would, I would hate to pass on my disease mitochondria
to my kids. Um That being said, the procedure isn't 100% clean like you, you
can't 100% get rid of mom's mitochondria. Um And so I, even though it seems, uh
but I still think it like, even if you have just 1% these mitochondria, the
healthy mitochondria are gonna be in an advantage. I think that the quandary
here is, this is the whole labeling of three parent babies. I think that that's
what people, especially in America who are a little bit more religious, are more
against than in the UK where it has been proved. Um So I think it's a little bit
less about, I think it's more about like, what is God's intention for the next
generation? Um And II, I don't, I don't play into that. I want, I want to give
the child the best possible life that they can have and I don't pretend to know
what God would want for us or, you know, regardless. So, um so I tend to follow
on the UK side of things, I think where I um I think it's ok to do it, but
you're right. It's germline editing and so you are in a non consenting
individual. And so you're um making those uh those decisions for your child and
their Children if, especially if it's a female. So, yeah, you're right. I don't
know a question. It is a hard question. So to clarify, you are possibly in
support of selecting the embryo or um well, mitochondrial replacement. I'm in,
I'm in favor of that and gosh, and for like selecting embryos, like, like for
IVF, if you have, are you talking about that for, if you have multiple may like
not selecting the female so that there's no germline editing going on, say it
one more time not selecting a female. So that like that. So making sure that
only males that you only have boys. I don't like that. Yeah, it's uncomfortable.
But I mean, it's true that, you know, then you're not affecting subsequent
generations, but I don't like the idea of taking a specific gender for offspring
that just, that just feels very, uh, I, I don't like that. Yeah, it's a tricky
question. I, I don't know how I feel about it either. I totally see the
argument. I can, I can see an argument towards picking what appears to be as
healthy of an offspring as possible. But I don't like, I don't like picking
genders so similar to that is now the PGS technology that's used in IVF, um,
very widely. So, what do you think about it? And do you think it's empowering
for families allowing them to make really good choices or do you think it could
be used harmfully? Uh, the, the book I, I'm reading in genetics right now, not
in bioinformatics. I get these books confused sometimes because they're both
genetics. Uh It made the argument that we're currently practicing eugenics and
is that that wasn't our class? I've come across a lot of like that. But yeah, uh
we're currently selecting what the next generations look like. And that argument
is like, oh, gosh. Uh I'm uncomfortable. So this is one of those questions that
like in an individual basis, it makes perfect sense to wanna select what appears
to be the healthiest embryo that's gonna lead to, you know, the healthy
healthiest kid because you wanna give your kid every advantage in the world. But
on mass it's like, uh uh like it seems ok and in case by case basis, but when
you consider it on mass, it, it does get really ethically questionable. But that
being said, oh, gosh, I don't know. Um, your body does this sometimes too. Like
this is what miscarriages are and as horrible as it is to go through. I, I can't
imagine how hard that is to go through. It's still a part of the natural, when,
when an embryo is not gonna be healthy, it, if it doesn't develop correctly,
it's, it's not maintained and, and, um, and I can understand if I were trying
IVF and I were spending tens of thousands of dollars of money that I don't have.
I would want to give myself the best chance of having a healthy offspring too. I
don't know the answer to this. I don't, I don't have, if it were me, I would do
it but making a choice for other people, which I don't think I have a right to
do, uh, a mass. I'm not, I'm not sure how I feel about it. Ok. Do you think
that? Oh, no, it's a great answer. I mean, these are really hard questions. Um,
but do you think that maybe some limitations should be put in place like a lot,
some recently people have been using PGS to select sex, which has been a big
issue. Um, but also they aren't paying a lot of money. So, but I, yeah, I think
you're right. I think maybe there could be boundaries about what's selectable
that, oh, I do think I do agree with this. Like a foolish consistency is the hot
be of little minds. And so just because biologically you don't get to pick your
sex, does that mean that if we're provided new technology to do it in a new way,
we shouldn't be allowed to do that. It, it feels like we shouldn't be allowed to
do that to me. But I also like, I can understand why a person, yeah, would wanna
be able to select one. Oh, I don't know. I don't know. I don't have a good, I
don't think that's totally ok. No, that's totally ok. These are, when I first
started doing this research, I had no idea that I was gonna get into these like
super tough questions. Like previously, I had just been like pro CRISPR pro
everything. Yay. This is awesome. And now I'm understanding. Oh, wow, this is
like these are really difficult questions to answer and I can understand a lot
of hesitancy to use this technology and maybe some regulations that should be
put in place. But also should we be telling people what to do with their
reproductive choices? So, yeah, it's really tricky and it's also, I think in the
book I read for my CRISPR class last year, they made a really good argument too
of what counts as a disorder versus what counts as like selecting something just
for convenience sake or whatever. Um It, that boundary is not as hard and fast
as it seems. For example, they gave a really good example of blindness. You
would or color blindness, for example, you wouldn't want to like you would want
your kid the blindness. Let's just stick with that one. In theory, most humans
are not blind. And so in theory, you'd want most parents might want their
Children to be able to see this is typical, but the blind community is a strong
community and they'd argue there's nothing wrong with us. And so like that, that
idea of what counts as preventing a disease versus not even though you'd want to
make an argument for one versus the other. That, that boundary is not very clear
either. So I've come across a lot of articles saying like when we, when we
decide to eliminate an embryo that may have Down Syndrome, like what are we
saying about people that do have Down Syndrome? Are we saying their lives are
not worth it? Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. It's, it's really tricky to answer those
questions. Right. Yeah. And yet the challenges that come with, with raising
someone who has down's syndrome, it, it is an added, you know, thing that the
family has to consider that is not. But then there are benefits to it too. So,
uh, yeah, exactly. I'm, it's, it's hard. I don't know. I don't know. Nobody
knows. No, nobody should say that they are certain about the right answer
because there are no right answers here. That is a terrific answer. Ok. Well,
that's all my questions. Thank you so much. I really appreciate it. Good. Thank
you for asking. This is so it's, it's fascinating. I recording stopped. OK?
